TBS OKTA-462790 Update custom email guide to include VTL (#3044)
okta/okta-developer-docs: packages/@okta/vuepress-site/docs/guides/custom-email/main/index.md

Email notifications are based on templates that are generated automatically and sent to end users according to your settings. Okta email templates are available in each Okta-supported language. You can use the default email templates as they are, or you can edit the text of the various email templates to send end users custom Okta-generated email messages.

> **Note:** When you edit a template, Okta stops sending the default in other languages. You are responsible for adding translations of your customized message. See [Edit a default template](#edit-a-default-template).

### Use the Brands API

The Brands API allows you to customize the look and feel of pages and templates, such as the Okta-hosted sign-in Page, error pages, email templates, and the Okta End-User Dashboard. You can brand these pages and templates without setting up a customized Okta URL domain.

> > **Note:** If you change any email code using the [Admin console](#edit-a-default-email-template), your customizations override the Brands API settings. To get your Brands API settings back, reset the code editors in the Admin Console to the default settings.

Reviewer: "your customizations *may* override the Theme objects values"

https://developer.okta.com/docs/reference/api/brands/#theme-api-objects

If the custom code removes the HTML variables for logo, color, etc..it will break the variant selection (that user made via API or Admin UI) but if they keep it, their emails will have both email customizatiosn AND the theme object selections.

Email notifications are based on templates that are generated automatically and sent to end users according to your settings. Okta email templates are available in each Okta-supported language. You can use the default email templates as they are, or you can edit the text of the various email templates to send end users custom Okta-generated email messages.

> **Note:** When you edit a template, Okta stops sending the default in other languages. You are responsible for adding translations of your customized message. See [Edit a default template](#edit-a-default-template).

### Use the Brands API

The Brands API allows you to customize the look and feel of pages and templates, such as the Okta-hosted sign-in Page, error pages, email templates, and the Okta End-User Dashboard. You can brand these pages and templates without setting up a customized Okta URL domain.

> > **Note:** If you change any email code using the [Admin console](#edit-a-default-email-template), your customizations may override the values of the Theme objects. To get your Theme object values back, reset the code editors in the Admin Console to the default settings.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> **Note:** If you change any email code using the [Admin Console](#edit-a-default-email-template), your customizations may override the values of the Theme objects. To get your Theme object values back, reset the code editors in the Admin Console to the default settings.
```

- If you customize an email template, you need to manually create a translation for each additional language that you support in your org.

## Edit a default email template

Use these steps to add or edit a template in one of the Okta-supported languages.

> > **Note:** Free trial editions of Okta can't create or send customized email templates.

Reviewer: "can't create or send customized email templates without contacting support@okta.com to request this feature"

Author: I'll add this note to the "What you need" section of the nutrition facts at the top of the page.

1. In the Admin Console, go to **Customizations** > **Emails**.

> 1. Select either **Okta Identity Engine templates** or **Okta Classic templates**.

Reviewer: delete, this drop down goes away with our GA

1. In the Admin Console, go to **Customizations** > **Emails**.
1. Choose an email template that you've customized. The default language version appears in the **Custom Email** table.
1. Click **Add Translation**, and then select a language from the drop-down box. If the **Add Translation** button isn't available, this template hasn't been customized. See [Edit a default email template](#edit-a-default-email-template]).
1. Make your translated edits, and then click **Add Translation**.
1. Repease steps 3 and 4 for additional languages.

To delete all custom translations and revert to the Okta template, click **Reset to Default**.

> **Note:** It may be more convenient to copy and paste the HTML from the message body into a text editor, compose your custom translation, then copy and paste it back into the message body.

### Velocity Templating Language

[Velocity Templating Language (VTL)](https://velocity.apache.org/engine/1.7/user-guide.html) allows you to customize your org's email templates so that you can use:

- enhanced conditional logic
- all of the attributes in the Okta [User Profile object](/docs/reference/api/users/#profile-object)

> - some of the org attributes in these macros

Reviewer: should we just list all the attributes instead of this unhelpful set of bullets? (which I wrote)

Graham just updated this doc: https://help.okta.com/en/oie/Content/Topics/Settings/velocity-variables.htm

Email templates use common and unique Velocity VTL variables. Variables that are to be interpolated in the content of the template are preceded by a dollar sign. Dot notation is used to reference sub-objects.

> For example, reference the first name of a user by using `$user.profile.firstName`.

Reviewer: lets use formal VTL syntax everywhere, so ${user.profile.firstName}

See [Velocity Templating Language](https://help.okta.com/okta_help.htm?type=oie&id=ext-velocity-variables) for available template variables.

> ## Use all User Profile attributes

Reviewer: same comment as above, might be best to just list all the attributes supported, since its not all user profile attributes https://help.okta.com/en/oie/Content/Topics/Settings/velocity-variables.htm

- If you customize an email template, you need to manually create a translation for each additional language that you support in your org.

## Edit a default email template

Use these steps to add or edit a template in one of the Okta-supported languages.

> **Note:** Free trial editions of Okta can't create or send customized email templates.

1. In the Admin Console, go to **Customizations** > **Emails**.
1. Click a default email template listed in the left pane.

> 1. Click **Edit** to open the message in HTML. If you see **Add Translation** instead of **Edit**, the template has already been customized. You need to make any additional edits in the default language version. Skip to Step 2 in [Add translations](#add-translations).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Click **Edit** to open the message in HTML. If you see **Add Translation** instead of **Edit**, the template is already customized. You need to make any additional edits in the default language version. Skip to step 2 in [Add translations](#add-translations).
```

1. Select a language from the dropdown menu.
1. Make your edits, and then click **Save**. The default language version of your edited message appears in the **Custom Email** table.

Remember that Okta doesn't automatically translate the changes you make in one template to the other language templates. To add translations for this customization, proceed to step 3 in [Add translations](#add-translations).

## Add translations

> * When multiple translations have been added for a template, the translation provided in the default language appears at the top of the list. You can designate any added translation as the default language by selecting it from the **Default Language** drop-down box. Doing so reorders the list of added translations automatically. You can edit the templates through the pencil icon, but you can't delete the default language template.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* When multiple translations are added for a template, the translation provided in the default language appears at the top of the list. You can designate any added translation as the default language by selecting it from the **Default Language** dropdown box. Doing so reorders the list of added translations automatically. You can edit the templates through the pencil icon, but you can't delete the default language template.
```

1. In the Admin Console, go to **Customizations** > **Emails**.

> 1. Choose an email template that you've customized. The default language version appears in the **Custom Email** table.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Choose an email template that you customized. The default language version appears in the **Custom Email** table.
```

> 1. Click **Add Translation**, and then select a language from the drop-down box. If the **Add Translation** button isn't available, this template hasn't been customized. See [Edit a default email template](#edit-a-default-email-template]).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Click **Add Translation**, and then select a language from the dropdown box. If the **Add Translation** button isn't available, this template isn't customized. See [Edit a default email template](#edit-a-default-email-template]).
```

1. Make your translated edits, and then click **Add Translation**.
1. Repease steps 3 and 4 for additional languages.

To delete all custom translations and revert to the Okta template, click **Reset to Default**.

> **Note:** It may be more convenient to copy and paste the HTML from the message body into a text editor, compose your custom translation, then copy and paste it back into the message body.

### Velocity Templating Language

[Velocity Templating Language (VTL)](https://velocity.apache.org/engine/1.7/user-guide.html) allows you to customize your org's email templates so that you can use:

- enhanced conditional logic
- all of the attributes in the Okta [User Profile object](/docs/reference/api/users/#profile-object)
- some of the org attributes in these macros

> Email templates use common and unique Velocity VTL variables. Variables that are to be interpolated in the content of the template are preceded by a dollar sign. Dot notation is used to reference sub-objects.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Email templates use common and unique Velocity VTL variables. When you interpolate variables in the template content, precede them with a dollar sign. Use dot notation to reference sub-objects.
```

For example, reference the first name of a user by using `${user.profile.firstName}`.

See [Velocity Templating Language](https://help.okta.com/okta_help.htm?type=oie&id=ext-velocity-variables) for available template variables.

## Use all User Profile attributes

You can reference any Okta User Profile attribute in your email templates. The reference notation is `${user.profile.attributeName}`, where `attributeName` is an attribute from the Okta User Profile. For example, use `${user.profile.displayName}` to reference the User Profile `displayName` attribute.

Other examples include:

> - Trigger an email in your end-users' preferred language by using conditional logic and calling the `preferredLanguage` attribute.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Trigger an email in your end user's preferred language by using conditional logic and calling the `preferredLanguage` attribute.
```

> **Note:** Free trial editions of Okta can't create or send customized email templates.

1. In the Admin Console, go to **Customizations** > **Emails**.
1. Click a default email template listed in the left pane.
1. Click **Edit** to open the message in HTML. If you see **Add Translation** instead of **Edit**, the template is already customized. You need to make any additional edits in the default language version. Skip to step 2 in [Add translations](#add-translations).
1. Select a language from the dropdown menu.
1. Make your edits. See [Velocity Templating Language](#velocity-templating-language) for customization options.
1. Click **Save**. The default language version of your edited message appears in the **Custom Email** table.

Remember that Okta doesn't automatically translate the changes you make in one template to the other language templates. To add translations for this customization, proceed to step 3 in [Add translations](#add-translations).

### Use customizable email templates

| UI name | Default subject line | API object reference | Description |
|---------|---------|----------------------|----------|---------|

> | User Activation | Welcome to Okta! | `UserActivation` | Sent to new users who must follow the provided link to complete the Okta sign up process |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| User Activation | Welcome to Okta! | `UserActivation` | Sent to new users who must follow the provided link to complete the Okta sign-up process |
```

> | Active Directory User Activation | Welcome to Okta! | `ADUserActivation` | Sent to your new Active Directory users who must follow the provided link to complete the Okta sign up process |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Active Directory User Activation | Welcome to Okta! | `ADUserActivation` | Sent to your new Active Directory users who must follow the provided link to complete the Okta sign-up process |
```

> | LDAP User Activation | Welcome to Okta! | `LDAPUserActivation` | Sent to your new LDAP users who must follow the provided link to complete the Okta sign up process |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| LDAP User Activation | Welcome to Okta! | `LDAPUserActivation` | Sent to your new LDAP users who must follow the provided link to complete the Okta sign-up process |
```

| Registration - Activation | Activate Account | `RegistrationActivation` | Sent to users who must follow the provided link to complete their self-registration |
| Registration - Email Verification | Welcome to (`instanceDisplayName`)! | `RegistrationEmailVerification` | Sent to users who must follow the provided link to verify their email address |
| Email Factor verification (Identity Engine)</br>Email Verification (Classic Engine) | Confirm your email address | `EmailFactorVerification` | Sent to users who must follow the provided link to verify their email address |
| Forgot Password Denied | Account Password Reset | `ForgotPasswordDenied` | Sent to users who forgot their password but only their admin can reset it |
| Password Reset by Admin | Account Password Reset | `PasswordResetByAdmin` | Sent to users who had their password reset by an Okta system administrator, and must follow the provided link to complete the password reset process |
| Active Directory Password Reset Denied | Forgotten Password | `ADForgotPasswordDenied` | Sent to Active Directory users who tried to reset their Active Directory password reset but don't have permission |

> | LDAP Forgot Password Denied | Account password reset | `LDAPForgotPasswordDenied` | Sent to LDAP users who tried to reset their LDAP password reset but don't have permission |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| LDAP Forgot Password Denied | Account password reset | `LDAPForgotPasswordDenied` | Sent to LDAP users who tried to reset their LDAP password but don't have permission |
```

| LDAP Forgot Password | Account password reset | `LDAPForgotPassword` | Sent to LDAP users who forgot their password and must follow the provided link to reset their password |
| Forgot Password | Account password reset | `ForgotPassword` | Sent to users who must follow the provided link to reset their forgotten password |

> | Active Directory Password Reset | Forgotten password (Identity Engine)</br>Account password reset (Classic Engine) | `ADForgotPassword` | Identity Engine: Sent to users who want to reset their Active Directory account password and must follow the provided link to reset password</br>Classic Engine: Sent to users who have had their Active Directory account password reset and must follow the provided link to reset password |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Active Directory Password Reset | Forgotten password (Identity Engine)</br>Account password reset (Classic Engine) | `ADForgotPassword` | Identity Engine: Sent to users who want to reset their Active Directory account password and must follow the provided link to reset their password</br>Classic Engine: Sent to users who have had their Active Directory account password reset and must follow the provided link to reset their password |
```

> | Password Changed | Password Changed | `PasswordChanged` | Sent to users whenever their account password is changed |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Password Changed | Password Changed | `PasswordChanged` | Sent to users whenever their account password changes |
```

| Self-Service Unlock when Account is not Locked | Unlock Account | `SelfServiceUnlockOnUnlockedAccount` | Sent to users who tried to use self-service to unlock an account that isn't locked |
| Active Directory Password Unlock | Unlock Account | `ADSelfServiceUnlock` | Sent to Active Directory users who must follow the provided link to unlock their password |
| Self-Service Unlock Account | Unlock Account | `SelfServiceUnlock` | Sent to users who must follow the provided link to complete self-service unlock account process |

> | LDAP Self-Service Unlock Account | Unlock Account | `LDAPSelfServiceUnlock` | Sent to LDAP users who must follow the provided link to complete self-service unlock account process |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| LDAP Self-Service Unlock Account | Unlock Account | `LDAPSelfServiceUnlock` | Sent to LDAP users who must follow the provided link to complete the self-service unlock account process |
```

| Change Email Confirmation | Confirm email address change | `ChangeEmailConfirmation` | Sent to users who must follow the provided link to confirm their email address change request |
| Email Change Notification | Notice of pending email address change | `PendingEmailChange` | Sent to a user's old email address when they request to change their email address |

> | Email Change Confirmed Notification | Notice of email address change | `EmailChangeConfirmation` | Sent when the request to change a user's email address has been confirmed |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Email Change Confirmed Notification | Notice of email address change | `EmailChangeConfirmation` | Sent when the request to change a user's email address is confirmed |
```

| Email Challenge | One-time Email Authentication Link | `EmailChallenge` | Sent to users with email as an authentication factor and must follow the provided link to complete their authentication into Okta |

> | Account Lockout | Account Lockout | `AccountLockout` | Sent to users who have been locked out of their account and must follow the provided link to complete the self-service unlock account process or contact their admin |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Account Lockout | Account Lockout | `AccountLockout` | Sent to users who are locked out of their account and must follow the provided link to complete the self-service unlock account process or contact their admin |
```

> | New Sign-On Notification | New Sign-On Notification | `NewSignOnNotification` | Sent to users who authenticated into Okta from an unknown device or browser and should contact the Okta system administrator if the user does not recognize the sign-in details of the unknown device |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| New Sign-On Notification | New Sign-On Notification | `NewSignOnNotification` | Sent to users who authenticated into Okta from an unknown device or browser and should contact the Okta system administrator if the user doesn't recognize the sign-in details of the unknown device |
```

| Campaign Launched | Access certification campaign: (`campaignName`) | `IGAReviewerNotification` |  |
| Campaign Ended | Access certification campaign: (`campaignName`) | `IGAReviewerEndNotification` |  |
| Campaign Reminder | Access certification campaign: (`campaignName`) | `IGAReviewerPendingNotification` |  |
| Reassigned Review | Access certification campaign: (`campaignName`) | `IGAReviewerReassigned` |  |

## Add translations

* When multiple translations are added for a template, the translation provided in the default language appears at the top of the list. You can designate any added translation as the default language by selecting it from the **Default Language** dropdown box. Doing so reorders the list of added translations automatically. You can edit the templates through the pencil icon, but you can't delete the default language template.

1. In the Admin Console, go to **Customizations** > **Emails**.
1. Choose an email template that you customized. The default language version appears in the **Custom Email** table.

> 1. Click **Add Translation**, and then select a language from the dropdown box. If the **Add Translation** button isn't available, this template isn't customized. See [Edit a default email template](#edit-a-default-email-template]).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Click **Add Translation**, and then select a language from the dropdown box. If the **Add Translation** button isn't available, this template isn't customized. See [Edit a default email template](#edit-a-default-email-template).
```

- If you customize an email template, you need to manually create a translation for each additional language that you support in your org.

## Edit a default email template

Use these steps to add or edit a template in one of the Okta-supported languages.

> > **Note:** Free trial editions of Okta can't create or send customized email templates.

Reviewer: same comment as above

You can also reference these org-level attributes, such as:

* `${org.name}`
* `${org.locale}`
* `${org.subDomain}`

## Use app context

<ApiLifecycle access="ie" />

> Okta Identity Engine orgs have access to app context within emails using VTL. When an end user enters an authentication flow, Identity Engine stores the app context in the state token. The following properties are available in the app context:

Reviewer 3: Just a nit - in some places we use `end user`, but in other places we use `end-user`.

> Okta Identity Engine orgs have access to app context within emails using VTL. When an end user enters an authentication flow, Identity Engine stores the app context in the state token. The following properties are available in the app context:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Okta Identity Engine orgs have access to app context within emails using VTL. When an end user enters an authentication flow, the Identity Engine stores the app context in the state token. The following properties are available in the app context:
```

* `${app.id}`
* `${app.name}`
* `${app.label}`

> When these properties are used with conditional logic, you can trigger branding for the specified app and define strings to uniquely customize an email template based on the app from where the email was triggered. App context is not available on Classic Engine since the state token does not exist there.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When these properties are used with conditional logic, you can trigger branding for the specified app and define strings to uniquely customize an email template based on the app from where the email was triggered. App context isn't available on the Classic Engine since the state token doesn't exist there.
```
